# MOCHA
python script to analyze half-frap experiments of cellular structures suspected of LLPS, using the MOCHA-FRAP workflow.

# Tutorial to perform half-frap experiments:

## Introduction
MOCHA-FRAP is a quantitative half-FRAP approach to assess if molecules in a structure of interest undergo liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) driven by multivalent interactions, or if they undergo low-valency interactions with spatially clustered binding sites (ICBS) on an immobile scaffold. In addition, MOCHA-FRAP quantifies the apparent energy barrier at the interface of structures of interest. This tutorial is intended to give a compact overview of the individual steps of the workflow. **A google colab and a jupyter notebook is available in this repository** for the user-friendly analysis of MOCHA-FRAP experiments.

**1. Sample considerations**
MOCHA-FRAP can be used to study both in vitro systems and living cells. In the latter case, the protein of interest has to be fused to a fluorescent protein. If the fusion protein is overexpressed, it should be beard in mind that LLPS is a concentration-dependent process that can be triggered by excessive overexpression, which should therefore be avoided. For in vitro systems, ideally only a small fraction of proteins is labeled to reduce potential artifacts induced by the dye. Furthermore, the buffer conditions and the protein concentration should be optimized to mimic those inside the cell. The glass surface on which the sample is placed should be passivated before the experiment to mitigate potential artifacts caused by interactions of the studied molecules with the glass surface.

**2. Half-FRAP experiment**
There are several microscopy parameters that should be optimized for the half-FRAP experiment. The size of the frame as well as the scanning speed should be chosen to reach the desired time resolution. From a first batch of experiments conducted with high time resolution, the half time of recovery should be estimated to then chose a time resolution that allows proper sampling of the recovery process. This is important because the dip in the non-bleached half can be present at very early time points. However, oversampling could lead to unnecessary acquisition photobleaching and should be avoided. Similarly, the laser intensity for the image acquisition is chosen to obtain a good compromise between a high signal-to-noise ratio and low acquisition photobleaching. The parameters for the photobleaching step should be chosen so that at least half of the intensity in one half is bleached while photobleaching in the other half should be minimal.
 
**3. Analysis of individual half-FRAP curves**
After data acquisition, each half-FRAP experiment is analyzed individually. In brief, the intensities of the bleached and non-bleached halves are quantified along with the total intensity from the cell/nucleus, which serves as a reference for acquisition photobleaching. In case the condensate has moved during the experiment, it is necessary to perform a registration. These steps can be done with an image analysis software such as Fiji. Alternatively, we have written a short python script to analyze the data, which we have integrated into a user-friendly google colab notebook (see link in the Code Availability Statement). The intensities in the bleached and non-bleached half are then normalized as described in the Methods section (“Half-FRAP data analysis”). This normalization includes the removal of a potential immobile fraction, which has to be performed to accurately quantify the dip depth.

**4. Analysis of averaged half-FRAP curves**
Once a sufficiently large number of individual half-FRAP experiments have been analyzed as described in the step above, the average and standard deviation of the normalized intensities in the bleached and non-bleached half are calculated, using any data analysis software (e.g., Excel, RStudio). To average curves originating from different-sized structures, for which dips occur at different time points, the time axes should be normalized before averaging. To do so, normalized half-FRAP curves are rescaled using the normalized time t’ = t/R2, where t is the time and R is the radius of the half-bleached structure. According to our in vitro experiments, freely diffusing proteins yield a dip depth of 10 ± 3 %, while LLPS goes along with larger dip depths and ICBS goes along with equal or smaller dip depths. To test if the measured dip depths are significantly larger than those obtained for the case of free diffusion, which would mean that molecules undergo LLPS, a one-sided Student’s t-test can be performed. The reference data set for free diffusion that can be used in this test yielded a mean dip depth µ = 10 %, a standard deviation σ = 2.83 %, and a sample size N = 7.

**5. Determination of the energy barrier**
If the dip depth obtained in the step above signals the presence of an interfacial barrier, i.e., if the dip depth is larger than 10 % with p < 0.01, this dip can be used along with the calibration curve determined in this work to estimate the energy barrier at the interface of the condensate. This energy corresponds to the energetic cost for crossing the interface, which can also be used as a proxy for the cohesive intermolecular interactions in the condensate. A more detailed explanation of the energy barrier and its interpretation is provided in the manuscript.


